performance tuning: add doc for tuning methods (#8895)
pingcap/docs: performance-tuning-methods.md

---

# Performance Analysis and Tuning

This document describes a database time-based approach to system tuning and illustrates how to use the TiDB [Performance Overview dashboard](/grafana-performance-overview-dashboard.md) for performance analysis and tuning.

With the methods described in this document, you can analyze user response time and database time from a global and top-down perspective to confirm whether the bottleneck in user response time is caused by database issues. If the bottleneck is in the database, you can use the database time overview and SQL latency breakdowns to locate the bottleneck and tune performance.

## Performance tuning based on database time

TiDB is constantly measuring and collecting SQL processing paths and database time. Therefore, it is easy to locate database performance bottlenecks in TiDB. Based on database time metrics, you can achieve the following two goals even without data on user response time:

- Determine whether the bottleneck is in TiDB by comparing the average SQL processing latency with the idle time of a TiDB connection in a transaction.

> - If the bottleneck is in TiDB, further locate the exact module in the distributed system based on database time overview, color-based performance data, key metrics, resource utilization, and top-down latency breakdowns.

Reviewer: the above two goals are ordered.

- Database Time By SQL Phase: The SQL execution phase is in green and other phases are in red on general. If non-green areas are large, it means much database time is consumed in other phases than the execution phase and further cause analysis is required. A common scenario is that the compile phase shown in orange takes a large area due to unavailability of the execution plan cache feature.
- SQL Execute Time Overview: Green metrics stand for common KV write requests (such as Prewrite and Commit), blue metrics stand for common KV read requests (such as Cop and Get), and metrics in other colors stand for unexpected situations which you need to pay attention. For example, pessimistic lock KV requests are marked red and TSO waiting is marked dark brown. If non-blue or non-green areas are large, it means there is bottleneck during SQL execution. For example:

    - If serious lock conflicts occur, the red area will take a large proportion.
    - If excessive time is consumed in waiting TSO, the dark brown area will take a large proportion.

**Example 1: TPC-C load**

![TPC-C](/media/performance/tpcc_db_time.png)

> - Database Time by SQL Type: Most time-consuming statements are commit, update, select and insert statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Database Time by SQL Type: Most time-consuming statements are `commit`, `update`, `select` and `insert` statements.
```

- Database Time by SQL Phase: The most time-consuming phase is SQL execution in green.

> - SQL Execute Time Overview: The most time-consuming KV requests in SQL execution are Prewrite and Commit in green.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SQL Execute Time Overview: The most time-consuming KV requests in SQL execution are `Prewrite` and `Commit` in green.
```

    > **Note:**
    >

>     > It is normal that the total KV request time is greater than the execute time. Because the TiDB executor may send KV requests to multiple TiKVs concurrently, causing the total KV request wait time to be greater than the execute time. In the preceding TPC-C load, TiDB sends Prewrite and Commit requests concurrently to multiple TiKVs when a transaction is committed. Therefore, the total time for Prewrite, Commit and PessimisticsLock requests in this example is obviously longer than the execute time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > It is normal that the total KV request time is greater than the `execute` time. Because the TiDB executor may send KV requests to multiple TiKVs concurrently, causing the total KV request wait time to be greater than the `execute` time. In the preceding TPC-C load, TiDB sends `Prewrite` and `Commit` requests concurrently to multiple TiKVs when a transaction is committed. Therefore, the total time for `Prewrite`, `Commit` and `PessimisticsLock` requests in this example is obviously longer than the `execute` time.
```

    >

>     > - The execute time may also be significantly greater than the total time of the KV request plus the tso_wait time. This means that the SQL execution time is spent mostly inside the TiDB executor. Here are two common examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > - The `execute` time may also be significantly greater than the total time of the KV request plus the `tso_wait` time. This means that the SQL execution time is spent mostly inside the TiDB executor. Here are two common examples:
```

- Database Time by SQL Phase: Most time is consumed in the execute phase in green.
- SQL Execute Time Overview: In SQL execution phase, pd tso_wait in dark brown, KV Get in blue, and Prewrite and Commit in green are time-consuming.

**Example 3: Read-only OLTP load**

![OLTP](/media/performance/oltp_long_compile_db_time.png)

- Database Time by SQL Type: Mainly are `SELECT` statements.
- Database Time by SQL Phase: Major time-consuming phases are compile in orange and execute in green. Latency in the compile phase is the highest, indicating that TiDB is taking too long to generate execution plans and the root cause needs to be further determined based on the subsequent performance data.
- SQL Execute Time Overview: The KV BatchGet requests in blue consume the most time during SQL execution.

> **Note:**
>
> In example 3, `SELECT` statements need to read thousands of rows concurrently from multiple TiKVs. Therefore, the total time of the BatchGet request is much longer than the execution time.

**Example 4: Lock contention load**

![OLTP](/media/performance/oltp_lock_contention_db_time.png)

- Database Time by SQL Type: Mainly are `UPDATE` statements.

> - Database Time by SQL Phase: Most time is consumed in the execute phase in green.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Database Time by SQL Phase: Most time is consumed in the `execute` phase in green.
```

> - SQL Execute Time Overview: The KV request PessimisticLock shown in red consumes the most time during SQL execution, and the execution time is obviously longer than the total time of KV requests. This is caused by serious lock conflicts in write statements and frequent lock retries prolong `Retried execution time`. Currently, TiDB does not measure `Retried execution time`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SQL Execute Time Overview: The KV request `PessimisticLock` shown in red consumes the most time during SQL execution, and its execution time is obviously longer than the total time of KV requests. This is caused by serious lock conflicts in write statements and frequent lock retries prolong `Retried execution time`. Currently, TiDB does not measure `Retried execution time`.
```

### TiDB key metrics and cluster resource utilization

#### Query Per Second, Command Per Second, and Prepared-Plan-Cache

> The following three panels in Performance Overview present the application load profile, how the application interacts with TiDB, and whether the application fully utilizes TiDB's [execution plan cache](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By checking the following three panels in Performance Overview, you can learn the application workload type, how the application interacts with TiDB, and whether the application fully utilizes TiDB [execution plan cache](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md).
```

Reviewer: reason: the three panels do not present such info directly so users need to check and decide that accordingly.

- QPS: Short for Query Per Second. It shows the count distribution of SQL statements executed by the application.

> - CPS By Type: CPS stands for Command Per Second. Command indicates MySQL protocol-specific commands. A query statement can be sent to TiDB either by a query command or a prepared statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CPS By Type: Short for Command Per Second. Command indicates MySQL protocol-specific commands. A query statement can be sent to TiDB either by a query command or a prepared statement.
```

> - Queries Using Plan Cache OPS: The count that the TiDB cluster hits the execution plan cache per second. Execution plan cache only supports the `prepared statement` command. When execution plan cache is enabled in TiDB, the following three scenarios will occur:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Queries Using Plan Cache OPS: The count that the TiDB cluster hits the execution plan cache per second. Execution plan cache only supports the `prepared statement` command. When the execution plan cache is enabled in TiDB, you will get one of the following three results:
```

Database time is the sum of all SQL processing time. A breakdown of the database time into the following three dimensions helps you quickly locate bottlenecks in TiDB:

- By SQL processing type: Determine which type of SQL statements consumes the most database time. The formula is:

    `DB Time = Select Time + Insert Time + Update Time + Delete Time + Commit Time + ...`

- By the 4 steps of SQL processing (get_token/parse/compile/execute): Determine which step consumes the most time. The formula is:

    `DB Time = Get Token Time + Parse Time + Compile Time + Execute Time`

- By executor time, TSO wait time, KV request time, and execution retry time: Determine which execution step causes the bottleneck. The formula is:

    `Execute Time ~= TiDB Executor Time + KV Request Time + PD TSO Wait Time + Retried execution time`

## Performance analysis and tuning using the Performance Overview dashboard

This section describes how to perform performance analysis and tuning based on database time using the Performance Overview dashboard in Grafana.

The Performance Overview dashboard orchestrates the metrics of TiDB, PD, and TiKV, and presents each of them in the following sections:

> - Database time and SQL execution time overview: Use different colors to distinguish different SQL types, database time of different SQL execution phases, and database time of different requests, which helps you quickly identify database workload characteristics and performance bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Database time and SQL execution time overview: Uses different colors to distinguish different SQL types, database time of different SQL execution phases, and database time of different requests, which helps you quickly identify database workload characteristics and performance bottlenecks.
```

- in-txn: The idle duration when the connection is within a transaction, i.e. the interval between processing the previous SQL and receiving the next SQL statement when the connection is within a transaction.
- not-in-txn: The interval between processing the previous SQL and receiving the next SQL statement when the connection is not within a transaction.

An applications connects to the same database when performing transactions. By comparing the average query latency with the connection idle duration, you can determine if TiDB is the bottleneck for overall system performance or if user response time jitter is caused by TiDB.

- If the application workload is not read-only and contains transactions, by comparing the average query latency with `avg-in-txn`, you can determine the time proportion in processing transactions both inside and outside the database, based on which you can locate the bottleneck in user response time. metric, you can compare the average query latency with `avg-not-in-txn`.

> In real customer scenarios, it is rare that the bottleneck is outside the database, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In real customer scenarios, it is not a rare case that the bottleneck is outside the database. For example:
```

- The average connection idle time in transactions `avg-in-txn` is 171 us.

It can be determined that the average query latency is significantly greater than `avg-in-txn`, which means the main bottleneck in transactions is inside the database.

**Example 2: The bottleneck in user response time is not in TiDB**

![TiDB is the Bottleneck](/media/performance/cloud_query_long_idle.png)

In this workload, the average query latency is 1.69 ms and `avg-in-txn` is 18 ms, indicating that TiDB spends 1.69 ms on average to process a SQL statement in transactions, and then needs to wait for 18 ms to receive the next statement.

It can be determined that the bottleneck of user response time is not in TiDB. This example is in a public cloud environment, where high network latency between the application and the database results in extremely high connection idle time because the application and the database are not in the same region.

#### Parse, Compile, and Execute Duration

> In TiDB, there is a [typical processing flow](/sql-tuning-concepts.md) from entering query statements to returning results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In TiDB, there is a [typical processing flow](/sql-tuning-concepts.md) from sending query statements to returning results.
```

> SQL processing in TiDB consists of four stages, `get token`, `parse`, `compile`, and `execute`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL processing in TiDB consists of four phases, `get token`, `parse`, `compile`, and `execute`.
```

- `get token`: Usually only a few microseconds and can be ignored. The token is limited only when the number of connections to a single TiDB instance reaches the [token-limit](/tidb-configuration-file.md) limit.
- `parse`: The query statements are parsed into abstract syntax tree (AST).

> - `compile`: Execution plans are compiled based on the AST and statistics of the `parse` phase. The `compile` phase contains logical optimization and physical optimization. Logical optimization optimizes query plans by rules, such as column pruning based on relational algebra. Physical optimization estimates the cost of the execution plans by statistical information and a cost-based optimizer, and selects the physical execution plan with the lowest cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `compile`: Execution plans are compiled based on the AST and statistics of the `parse` phase. The `compile` phase contains logical optimization and physical optimization. Logical optimization optimizes query plans by rules, such as column pruning based on relational algebra. Physical optimization estimates the cost of the execution plans by statistics and a cost-based optimizer and selects a physical execution plan with the lowest cost.
```

> - `execute`: The time consumption depends on the situation. TiDB first waits for the globally unique timestamp TSO. Then the executor constructs the TiKV API request based on the Key range in the operator of the execution plan and distributes it to TiKV. `execute` time includes the TSO wait time, the KV request time, and the time spent by TiDB executor in processing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `execute`: The time consumption depends on the situation. TiDB first waits for the globally unique timestamp TSO. Then the executor constructs the TiKV API request based on the Key range of the operator in the execution plan and distributes it to TiKV. `execute` time includes the TSO wait time, the KV request time, and the time spent by TiDB executor in processing data.
```

> If the application uses the `query` or `StmtExecute` MySQL command interface globally, you can use the following formula to locate the bottleneck in average latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an application uses the `query` or `StmtExecute` MySQL command interface globally, you can use the following formula to locate the bottleneck in average latency.
```

```
avg Storage Async Write Duration = avg Store Duration + avg Apply Duration
```

> **Note:**
>
> `Store Duration` and `Apply Duration` are supported since v5.3.0.

**Example 1: Comparison of the same OLTP workload in v5.3.0 and v5.4.0**

According to the preceding formula, the QPS of a write-heavy OLTP workload in v5.4.0 is 14% higher than that in v5.3.0:

- v5.3.0: 24.4 ms ~= 17.7 ms + 6.59 ms
- v5.4.0: 21.4 ms ~= 14.0 ms + 7.33 ms

In v5.4.0, the gPRC module has been optimized to accelerate Raft log replication, which reduces `Store Duration` compared with v5.3.0.

v5.3.0:

![v5.3.0](/media/performance/v5.3.0_store_apply.png)

v5.4.0:

![v5.4.0](/media/performance/v5.4.0_store_apply.png)

**Example 2: Store Duration is a bottleneck**

Apply the preceding formula: 10.1 ms ~= 9.81 ms + 0.304 ms. The result indicates that the latency bottleneck for write requests is in `Store Duration`.

![Store](/media/performance/cloud_store_apply.png)

#### Commit Log Duration, Append Log Duration, and Apply Log Duration

> `Commit Log Duration`, `Append Log Duration`, and `Apply Log Duration` are latency records for key operations within raftstore. These latencies are captured at the batch operation level, with each operation combines multiple write requests. Therefore, the latencies do not directly correspond to the `Store Duration` and `Apply Duration` mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Commit Log Duration`, `Append Log Duration`, and `Apply Log Duration` are latency records for key operations within raftstore. These latencies are captured at the batch operation level, with each operation combined by multiple write requests. Therefore, the latencies do not directly correspond to the `Store Duration` and `Apply Duration` mentioned above.
```

**Example 2: Commit Log Duration is a bottleneck**

![Store](/media/performance/cloud_append_commit_apply.png)

- Average `Append Log Duration` = 4.38 ms
- Average `Commit Log Duration` = 7.92 ms
- Average `Apply Log Duration` = 172 us

For the `Store` thread, `Commit Log Duration` is obviously higher than `Apply Log Duration`. Meanwhile, `Append Log Duration` is significantly higher than `Apply Log Duration`, indicating that the `Store` thread might suffer from bottlenecks in both CPU and I/O. Possible ways to reduce `Commit Log Duration` and `Append Log Duration` are as follows:

- If TiKV CPU resources are sufficient, consider adding `Store` threads by increasing the value of `raftstore.store-pool-size`.
- If TiDB is v5.4.0 or later, consider enabling [`Raft Engine`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#raft-engine) by setting `raft-engine.enable: true`. Raft Engine has a light execution path. This helps reduce I/O writes and long-tail latency of writes in some scenarios. 
- If TiKV CPU resources are sufficient and TiDB is v5.3.0 or later, consider enabling [`StoreWriter`](/tune-tikv-thread-performance.md#tikv-thread-pool-tuning) by setting `raftstore.store-io-pool-size: 1`.

> ## What should I do to use the Performance Overview dashboard in TiDB clusters earlier than v6.1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## If my TiDB version is earlier than v6.1.0, what should I do to use the Performance Overview dashboard? 
```

> Starting from v6.1.0, Grafana has a built-in Performance Overview dashboard by default. This dashboard is compatible with TiDB v4.x and v5.x versions. If your TiDB is earlier than v6.0.0, you need to manually import [`performance_overview.json`](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/blob/master/metrics/grafana/performance_overview.json), as shown in the following figure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from v6.1.0, Grafana has a built-in Performance Overview dashboard by default. This dashboard is compatible with TiDB v4.x and v5.x versions. If your TiDB is earlier than v6.1.0, you need to manually import [`performance_overview.json`](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/blob/master/metrics/grafana/performance_overview.json), as shown in the following figure:
```

v5.3.0:

![v5.3.0](/media/performance/v5.3.0_commit_append_apply.png)

v5.4.0:

![v5.4.0](/media/performance/v5.4.0_commit_append_apply.png)

**Example 2: Commit Log Duration is a bottleneck**

![Store](/media/performance/cloud_append_commit_apply.png)

- Average `Append Log Duration` = 4.38 ms
- Average `Commit Log Duration` = 7.92 ms
- Average `Apply Log Duration` = 172 us

For the `Store` thread, `Commit Log Duration` is obviously higher than `Apply Log Duration`. Meanwhile, `Append Log Duration` is significantly higher than `Apply Log Duration`, indicating that the `Store` thread might suffer from bottlenecks in both CPU and I/O. Possible ways to reduce `Commit Log Duration` and `Append Log Duration` are as follows:

- If TiKV CPU resources are sufficient, consider adding `Store` threads by increasing the value of `raftstore.store-pool-size`.
- If TiDB is v5.4.0 or later, consider enabling [`Raft Engine`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#raft-engine) by setting `raft-engine.enable: true`. Raft Engine has a light execution path. This helps reduce I/O writes and long-tail latency of writes in some scenarios.

> - If TiKV CPU resources are sufficient and TiDB is v5.3.0 or later, consider enabling [`StoreWriter`](/tune-tikv-thread-performance.md#tikv-thread-pool-tuning) by setting `raftstore.store-io-pool-size: 1`.

Author: ```suggestion
- If TiKV CPU resources are sufficient and TiDB is v5.3.0 or later, consider enabling [`StoreWriter`](/tune-tikv-thread-performance.md#performance-tuning-for-tikv-thread-pools) by setting `raftstore.store-io-pool-size: 1`.
```
